# Lab Class of 27 April 2023

<!-- @import "[TOC]" {cmd="toc" depthFrom=1 depthTo=6 orderedList=false} -->

## PyAutoGUI

> PyAutoGUI lets your Python scripts control the mouse and keyboard to automate interactions with other applications. The API is designed to be simple. PyAutoGUI works on Windows, macOS, and Linux, and runs on Python 2 and 3. [^sweigart2019WelcomePyAutoGUIDocumentation]

### Installation

It is easy to install *PyAutoGUI* using `pip`:

```bash
pip install pyautogui
```

### Basic Elements

PyAutoGUI is most often used for **moving the mouse** on the screen, and **performing keyboard functions** on various user interface elements on the primary screen. Furthermore, it is possible to use PyAutoGUI to **interact with message boxes**, and to **create screenshots**.

### Mouse Functions

This set of functions is used to interact with the mouse pointer on the main screen of the host machine.

The most important functions to interact with the mouse cursor on the main screen are about moving the mouse and clicking: `moveTo()` and `moveRel()`, `dragTo()` and `dragRel()`, and `click()`. While `moveTo()` and `dragTo()` move the mouse cursor to the specified location, either instantaneously or using a specific movement to drag the mouse cursor across the given screen. The second set of functions, `moveRel()` and `dragRel()`, calculates the location or the distance whereto the mouse cursor should be more open. It should be noted here that `drag` functions perform a click-and-drag operation, with the possibility of defining the button to be held down while dragging from the list of `["left", "middle", "right"]`. The last, `click()` function is used to simulate the click action of the mouse.

The following will move the mouse cursor to the position `(42, 21)`, in 2 seconds.

```Python
pyautogui.moveTo(42, 12, duration=2)
```

When one of the coordinates should stay unchanged, the respective argument should be of `None` value.

The above will move the mouse cursor to a specified absolute location on the screen. The following line of code will move the mouse cursor for 42 towards the right-hand side of the screen, over one second.

```Python
pyautogui.moveRel(42, 0, duration=1)
```

In order to give PyAutoGUI an instruction to click at a certain position on the primary screen, one would use the `click()` method. Several arguments can be used as input to that specific method, including the coordinates where the click will occur, the number of clicks to be performed, the length of the interval between two clicks, and the button to be clicked. All of the arguments are optional, i.e. the method can be called simply as `click()`.

```Python
pyautogui.click(42, 12, clicks=7, interval=3, button="right")
```

`click()` function can be used to move the mouse cursor around as well, since it can be given coordinates directly as input values of the applicable arguments, such as in the following example:

```Python
for _ in range(100):
    pyautogui.click(randint(250, 400), randint(450, 600))
```

Specific simplifications are available, such as `doubleClick()` and `tripleClick()`.

### Keyboard Functions

The basic way to simulate keyboard using PyAutoGUI is to use it to write out strings of characters using the available `write()` method. This method can be rather simple, but provides multiple arguments that can be used to fine-tune its performance. The following line shows how to type out the string *Mae govannen!* with the interval of 0.5 s between each two typed symbols:

```Python
pyautogui.write('Mae govannen!', interval=0.5)
```

Some actions demand keys to be pressed and for them to remain pressed, e.g. when performing a keystroke combination. PyAutoGUI offers functions `keyDown()` and `keyUp()` methods for that purpose, in addition to the `press()` method, which is basically the combination of both of the previous ones. All three of these functions must have a string from `pyautogui.KEYBOARD_KEYS` [^2cICkl6S] as an input argument value.

The following code will press the key `right` four times:

```Python
pyautogui.press(['right', 'right', 'right', 'right'])
```

The following piece of code will have the same result as well:

```Python
pyautogui.press('right', presses=4)
```

In specific cases, it might be necessary to press a combination of several keys, whereat the `hotkey()` function is useful, as shown in the following example:

```Python
pyautogui.hotkey('ctrl', 'alt', 'del')
```

### Screenshot Functions

In order to make screenshots and recognise visual elements within screenshots, PyAutoGUI needs another tool/command when used in Linux (`scrot`) or OS X (`screencapture`). OS X has it installed by default, while Linux users can install it as follows:

```bash
sudo apt install scrot
```

To make a screenshot using PyAutoGUI, the `screenshot()` function is used. If a string is given as an argument value, the screenshot will be saved, in addition to being returned as an object:

```Python
pyautogui.screenshot('cookies.png')
```

To locate a specific image on the screen and receive a quadruple `Box(left=945, top=472, width=74, height=25)` without having to take a screenshot and then analysing it, the `locateOnScreen()` function is useful, with the value of its argument being the image that is sought after on the screen, e.g.:

```Python
>>> pyautogui.locateOnScreen('LC20230427_cookie.png')
Box(left=945, top=472, width=74, height=25)
```

In order to find where the reference image can be seen on the screen, get the center of it, and click in the centre of it, the following piece of code might be used:

```Python
import pyautogui

cookie = pyautogui.locateOnScreen("LC20230427_english.png")
cookie_centre = pyautogui.center(cookie)
pyautogui.click(cookie_centre.x, cookie_centre.y)
```

To simplify the process even more, it is possible to use the `locateCenterOnScreen()` function, which returns a tuple with only two elements, which correspond to the `x` and `y` coordinates of the centre of the located element (if located), for example:

```Python
import pyautogui

x, y = pyautogui.locateCenterOnScreen("LC20230427_grandma.png")
try:
    pyautogui.click(x, y)
except Exception as e:
    raise e
```

## Python Subprocess

> The subprocess module allows you to spawn new processes, connect to their input/output/error pipes, and obtain their return codes. [^pythonsoftwarefoundation2023SubprocessSubprocessManagement]

### Install

Subprocess is a library that is by default available in a Python installation.

### Basic Elements

It is possible to run processes of the host operating system directly from Python. One of the possible approaches is to use the `subprocess` library.

In order to run a process that is not contained within the currently running python script or software, we might use the run() function, as follows:

```Python
subprocess.run(
    ['ls', '-l']
)
```

The above piece of code is used to run the `ls -l` command in Linux, which is used for listing files in the current working directory, using a long listing format. Notice that arguments of the initial command are separated as elements of a list of values given as an argument.

In order to catch, save, and work with the results of the command ran via the `run()` function, the relevant function argument must be used and set to `True`, e.g.:

```Python
res = subprocess.run(
    ['ls', '-l'],
    capture_output=True
)
print(res.stdout)
```

The output of the run subprocess is saved as a part of the returned object.

While `run()` function is the default and recommended approach to invoking subprocesses and running commands outside of Python, another function of the library might be even more useful. `Popen()` function allows for more flexibility in managing the invoked subprocess.

Invoking a subprocess using the `popen()` function enables the developer to interact with the subprocess, wait for its termination, read process ID of the subprocess, terminate it or kill it, etc.

## Bibliography

[^sweigart2019WelcomePyAutoGUIDocumentation]: Sweigart, A. (2019). Welcome to PyAutoGUI’s documentation! [Read the Docs]. PyAutoGUI. https://pyautogui.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html

[^2cICkl6S]: <https://pyautogui.readthedocs.io/en/latest/keyboard.html#keyboard-keys>

[^pythonsoftwarefoundation2023SubprocessSubprocessManagement]: Python Software Foundation. (2023, April 26). subprocess—Subprocess management [Python documentation]. Subprocess — Subprocess Management. https://docs.python.org/3/library/subprocess.html
